["Hong Kong, March 8 (AFP) -- Jardine Matheson Ltd., 
Hong Kong's oldest and greatest trading house, refused Tuesday 
to rule out a retreat from Hong Kong's stock exchange if it is 
denied its request to exclusively be subject to Bermuda's 
takeover code. Jardines company secretary Neil McNamara told AFP 
that talks with the Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission 
(SFC) for an exemption from the British colony's takeover code 
were still underway. But he would neither confirm nor deny 
whether a delisting of any or all of the six Jardines-controlled 
companies on the Hong Kong stock exchange might result if the 
exemption fails to come through. "I think it it's premature to 
speculate on any outcome of discussions," McNamara said. "When 
one discusses something with the SFC, it's preferable that it be 
kept confidential while the discussions are ongoing. 
  The takeover-code issue stems from Jardines' bombshell 
announcement in 1984 that it would register in another British 
colony, Bermuda, before Hong Kong is returned to China in 1997. 
It now wants to be subject exclusively to Bermuda's takeover 
code when it takes effect in July this year -- thus avoiding the 
legal uncertainties of a post-1997 Hong Kong. In particular, 
the Bermuda code would allow Jardines to resist a hostile 
takeover attempt in the Bermuda courts and, in the case of a 
final appeal, to the Privy Council in London. "It's a 
preference to be regulated under the British corporate system," 
McNamara said. "That's been said before." 
  Hong Kong's EASTERN EXPRESS newspaper, without quoting 
sources, said Tuesday that Jardines' board would discuss this 
week whether to delist in Hong Kong -- a move that could wipe 
off 6.7 percent of the market's capitalization. The report had 
little effect on the price of Jardines' flagship stock, Jardine 
Matheson (Holdings) Ltd., which in afternoon trading was up 50 
cents at 66 Hong Kong dollars (8.51 US). The Jardines stable is 
to announce 1993 results over a one- week period that begins 
March 17 with Dairy Farm International Holdings Ltd. 
  The SFC declined to comment in detail on its talks with 
Jardines, besides stating that the Hong Kong takeover code still 
applies to the group. "Our over-riding principle is to seek to 
protect the interest of investors and to maintain the 
credibility of Hong Kong as an international financial center," 
an SFC spokesman added. There was also no comment from stock 
exchange's listings division, which requires 90 days' notice of 
any delisting. 
  Founded by two Scots in 1832 to sell Indian opium to China, 
Jardines remains Hong Kong's most pervasive conglomerate, 
involved in almost every sector from real estate and 
stockbroking to supermarkets and parking lots. 
  China has made no secret of its distaste for Jardines. 
Besides occasionally harping on its opium-trading origins, it 
has lashed out at its biggest shareholder, the Keswick family, 
for supporting Governor Chris Patten's efforts to introduce more 
democracy in Hong Kong before 1997. 
  The last time Jardines faced a hostile takeover was in May 
1988, when four tycoons led by Cheung Kong (Holdings) Ltd. 
chairman Li Ka- shing -- who enjoys privileged access to 
Beijing's communist leaders -- moved in on Hongkong Land. They 
succeeded in acquring eight percent before Li agreed not to 
pounce on any Jardines company for seven years -- a period that 
expires in April 1995. 
  Besides Jardine Matheson (Holdings) and Dairy Farm, other 
listed Jardine companies are Hongkong Land Holdings Ltd., 
Jardine International Motor Holdings Ltd., Mandarin Oriental 
International Ltd. and Jardine Strategic Holdings Ltd.", "Hong Kong stands to lose up to $187 billion, or 
nine percent of its yearly trade, if China's Most Favoured 
Nation (MFN) status is withdrawn this year. The territory's 
re-exports from China to the United States, which account for 60 
percent of total exports to the country, would suffer a loss of 
up to $77 billion, or 46 percent, according to the latest 
assessment from the Trade Department. 
  "A reduction of up to $77 billion worth of re-exports is 
double the impact we estimated in 1990," the department's deputy 
director-general, Christopher Jackson, said. "This is largely 
the result of the very rapid growth in Hong Kong's re-export of 
China-made goods to the United States over the past few years," 
he said. The loss of MFN would see tariff rates in China 
increase by two to 10 times, according to the department's 
principal economist Cheung Hok-ying. 
  Mr Jackson said the figures did not take into account China 
retaliating against the U.S. by restricting the number of 
American products coming into China. "However, in this area, 
Hong Kong is less vulnerable. Only 30 percent of U.S. exports 
to China travel through Hong Kong," he said. 
  While outlining the potential loss to Hong Kong's economy, 
Mr 
Jackson said: "No community is more concerned about human 
rights then Hong Kong but the issue, in this context, is a 
matter between the U.S. and China. 
  "For Hong Kong, our message remains focused on the impact, 
or 
economic damage, that the MFN withdrawal will have on Hong 
Kong." This is the same message the Government will present in 
Washington as part of its lobbying efforts to have China retain 
MFN status. 
  Hong Kong's role as a gateway to China was also likely to be 
undermined, thus affecting longer-term growth potential and 
business confidence. Manufacturing investment ventures and 
other production arrangements by Hong Kong and foreign companies 
in China, including American firms, were likely to suffer 
significantly. 
  Mr Jackson said related trade flows, such as the import of 
raw material to Hong Kong and into China and other countries, 
could hurt Hong Kong's trade by as much as nine percent. Other 
areas which would take a blow were transport storage, banking, 
finance, insurance and many other areas of the service sector 
which supported Hong Kong's role as an entrepot. 
  The chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce, Gerry 
Murdock, said MFN status had become the most important issue in 
Sino-U.S. relations. "And this should not be the case," he 
said. U.S.-China relations should move beyond this point. ", "Beijing, 7 Mar (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE)--Upon his 
arrival in Beijing from Hong Kong today to attend the Second 
Session of the Eighth National People's Congress [NPC], Zhou 
Nan, NPC deputy and director of the Hong Kong Branch of the 
XINHUA NEWS AGENCY, told reporters during a special interview 
that, although the British side is not cooperating on the Hong 
Kong issue, the Chinese side, along with the Hong Kong 
compatriots, can absolutely ensure Hong Kong's steady transition 
and prolonged prosperity and stability. This is beyond 
question, and no force can stop us from achieving this objective. 
  Zhou Nan said: We are now in an important period for the 
country to carry out reform and opening up and establish the 
socialist market economy. Some major reform measures will be 
introduced. We hope to solicit opinions through these "two 
sessions" and correctly handle the relations between 
development, stability, and reform. In addition, we will 
further carry out the policy of "doing two types of work 
simultaneously," namely, we will pay attention to material and 
spiritual civilizations and to the formation of the democratic 
and legal systems to enable the country's economic modernization 
to embark on a healthy track. 
  One of the two reporters asked if the Hong Kong issue would 
become a hot topic at the "two sessions." Zhou Nan said he 
believed that Premier Li Peng's government work report would 
refer to the Hong Kong issue, that the Hong Kong NPC deputies 
and members as well as the mainland NPC deputies and members 
will make some comments on the Hong Kong situation, and that, to 
express state and popular intentions, the NPC and the National 
Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Conference will, of course, respond to this issue. ", "Hong Kong members of the National Committee of the 
Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference [CPPCC] who 
are to attend the Second Session of the Eighth CPPCC National 
Committee left Hong Kong for Beijing by plane at noon today. 
  [Begin recording] [Unidentified CPPCC member] I think 
everyone has now clearly seen that during the remaining time, it 
is impossible to place our hopes on the British side for 
cooperation for a smooth transition of power. 
  [Second unidentified CPPCC member] Now, the Hong Kong issue 
is not whether or not we want democracy. The process for 
democracy has been properly arranged by the Basic Law. It 
includes a method by which we can proceed in an orderly way and 
step by step. It can enable Hong Kong to develop properly and 
to prosper today, tomorrow, and in the future. The 
complications and the causes have all been created by the 
British side, which has ulterior motives. Therefore, the 
compatriots in Hong Kong and the people in China will not agree 
with them.", "The 
director of XINHUA Hong Kong Branch, Zhou Nan, said here today: 
"Without the British side's cooperation, we can certainly 
achieve a smooth transfer of power in Hong Kong and administer 
it better. We will stand firm together with the large number of 
Hong Kong people who love China and Hong Kong in the recovery of 
Hong Kong's sovereignty, following the principles of `one 
country, two systems,' and `Hong Kong people ruling Hong Kong' 
set out in the Basic Law." 
  At a ceremony to issue letters of appointment to advisers to 
Hong Kong regional affairs held today, Zhou Nan said: "Since 
Hong Kong entered the transitional period, Deng Xiaoping has 
repeatedly stressed it is important for those Hong Kong people 
who love China and Hong Kong to actively participate in all 
sorts of social and political affairs. In the previous period, 
according to suggestions made by Hong Kong people, the Chinese 
Government has set up the Preliminary Work Committee of the 
Preparatory Committee of the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region and has appointed two batches of advisers on Hong Kong 
affairs. Facts have proved that these moves are conducive to 
Hong Kong's prosperity and stability and are also an effective 
way to encourage Hong Kong people to get involved in social and 
political affairs in the transition period and to prepare them 
for `administering Hong Kong'." 
  Zhou Nan pointed out: "The historic moment when Hong Kong 
will return to the embrace of the motherland is drawing near. 
Although there are people who have tried in every possible way 
to create obstacles to the return of Hong Kong to its 
motherland, their wishful attempts are doomed to failure. The 
Chinese people, who have risen to their feet, will never allow 
themselves to be ordered about and trampled upon any more." 
  Zhou Nan quoted Deng Xiaoping as saying: "Every son and 
daughter of the Chinese people takes pride in their nation, no 
matter what clothes they are dressed in and what position they 
hold. Hong Kong people also have a sense of pride in their 
nation. Hong Kong people can administer Hong Kong well. They 
should have such confidence in themselves. Hong Kong's 
prosperity has been brought about by Hong Kong people with 
Chinese as the main body." 
  Zhou Nan stressed: "We must create such confidence: Without 
British cooperation, we can still achieve a smooth transition 
and administer Hong Kong well." He hoped the appointed advisers 
on regional affairs would, together with the Hong Kong people, 
make concerted efforts to remove all obstacles and work for a 
smooth transition and a happier and more prosperous Hong Kong.", "Beijing, 5 Mar (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE)--After the 
Chinese Foreign Ministry released the document on the facts of 
the Sino- British talks on the 1994/95 electoral arrangements 
for Hong Kong, some Beijing scholars have commented on the 
British side's attempts to undermine the talks. They have 
pointed out that the introduction of a British-type "democratic" 
election system is disadvantageous to Hong Kong. 
  Qiu Liben, an associate research fellow at the World History 
Research Institute of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, 
said: Whenever Britain was about to withdraw from a colony, it 
tried to change the system in which the executive branch 
dominates the legislative branch, under the camouflage of 
democracy. The British typically would foster and manipulate 
forces within the legislative council, vigorously introduce 
"democratic" elections, and thus sow the seeds of turmoil. If 
the outcome of the elections did not conform with British 
interests, they would wipe it out. This type of hypocritical 
democratic "direct elections" must be exposed immediately. 
  Professor Liu Wenzong of the International Law Research 
Center of the Institute of Diplomacy, pointed out even more 
bluntly: By introducing overall direct elections in Hong Kong, 
the British side actually intends to launch a series of 
"reforms" to confront the Basic Law and thus create chaos. 
Chris Patten once revealed: "The executive branch must be made 
accountable to the legislative organ around 1997." In a "report 
by missions to Hong Kong" written in 1991, the British side said 
that it is necessary to have the chief executive directly 
elected by the public, and suggested that the chief executive be 
accountable to the legislative organ of the special 
administrative region rather than to the Chinese Government. 
These remarks and views have all exposed the British side's 
intention of disrupting the stable transition process in Hong 
Kong. 
  Zhang Shunhong of the World History Research Institute of 
the 
Academy of Social Sciences maintained that Britain's ultimate 
purpose in "bestowing" its "democratic system" on its colonies 
is to facilitate its infiltration and safeguard its economic 
privileges and interests.", "Beijing, 5 Mar (XINHUA) -- Owing to the British 
side's recent moves, the Hong Kong issue has again attracted 
worldwide attention. First of all, following an intense 
publicity campaign, Chris Patten instigated the British 
Legislative Council [Legco] in Hong Kong to adopt his partial 
constitutional package. Then, the British side published the 
White Paper in which it unilaterally publicized the so-called 
contents of the Sino-British talks about elections in Hong Kong. 
For the sake of clarification, the Chinese Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs publicized on 28 February the facts of the several 
issues discussed in the Sino-British talks on Hong Kong's 
1994/95 elections, thus exposing to the world the way the 
British violated the Sino-British Joint Declaration, the Hong 
Kong Basic Law, and the accords and understandings that China 
and Britain had reached, as well as the British side's 
deliberate attempts to undermine Sino-British cooperation and 
the Sino-British talks. 
  The recent Sino-British disputes show that, in an attempt to 
extend its colonial interests, Britain may disregard 
international faith, play tricky games, and do whatever it 
wants. They did that during the negotiations, and their recent 
move to unilaterally publicize the so-called contents of the 
Sino-British talks was also no exception. When the talks 
started, the two sides, to create a good atmosphere for the 
talks, reached an agreement that the contents of the talks 
should be kept confidential. China, of course, was not against 
the publication of the contents of the talks at the right time. 
China, being open and aboveboard during the talks, has nothing 
to hide from the world. But since an agreement had been 
reached, the contents of the talks should not have been 
publicized until the two sides consulted one another through 
diplomatic chennels. This is a basic international faith that 
should be abided by. However, the British side, without any 
consultations with China, acted unilaterally to publicize the 
so-called contents of the Sino-British negotiations in an 
unexpected manner on the same day Chris Patten instigated the 
Hong Kong Legco to adopt his partial constitutional package. He 
wanted to use one- sided and distorted facts to shirk to China 
the responsibility for the breakdown of the Sino-British talks, 
taking advantage of the psychology that "first impressions are 
the strongest." People can see how ignominous the British 
side's move was! 
  When the contents of Sino-British talks publicized by the 
Chinese and the British side are analyzed and compared, the 
flaws which the British side tried to hide come to light. For 
example, before the Sino-British talks started, Chinese Vice 
Foreign Minister Jiang Enzhu presented a diplomatic note to 
British Ambassador to China Robin McLaren, presenting to the 
British side the five-point conditions for the reopening of the 
negotiations. The fifth point states: "If the British side 
submits the constitutional package to the Legislative Council 
for discussion, it shows a total lack of sincerity on the part 
of the British side, and it means that China shall not be held 
responsible if the talks break down." But this important note 
is not mentioned at all in the white paper. Moreover, the 
Chinese side again reminded the British side about this point 
during the 17th round of talks, but the white paper also totally 
ignores this reminder. This being the case, how could the 
British side state that the white paper has publicized "all the 
facts"? The world can see that, to hide its total lack of 
sincerity in the talks and to cover up its responsibility for 
the termination of the talk, the British side is ready to 
hoodwink the public! 
  Let us now take a look at the negotiation process. The 
British side states in the white paper that it withdrew from the 
negotiations because it could not achieve a common understanding 
with the Chinese side on two issues. The first one is about 
Legco's single-seat, single-vote voting method; and the second 
one is the elimination of appointed seats on district boards and 
the two municipal councils. The facts publicized by the Chinese 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs show that this is again an ignoble 
move by the British side. First of all, the two sides had yet 
to discuss Legco's voting method, and the Chinese side only 
hoped that more complex issues concerning arrangements for 
Legco's election in 1995 will not be discussed until an accord 
has been reached on issues that can be easier to deal with -- 
issues about arrangements for the 1994/95 elections of district 
boards and the two municipal councils -- because that would help 
the two sides reach an accord. Second, on the issue of 
maintaining the appointed seats, the Chinese side, considering 
the fact that Hong Kong's district boards and the two municipal 
councils were commonly opposed to the elimination of the 
appointment system and considering the system's actual 
operations, proposed that the existing number of appointed seats 
be maintained. The British side, however, disagreed. To reach 
an agreement at an early date, the Chinese side conceded three 
times and came up with a plan which took into consideration the 
two sides' positions and which sidestepped differences so that 
the British side would not have to set up appointed seats before 
30 June 1997 and then the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region [HKSAR] Government can set up a proportionally 
appropriate number of appointed seats according to the relevant 
provisions of the Basic Law. This totally positive and 
constructive proposal fully explained the Chinese side's 
sincerity and flexibility in solving problems. However, in the 
White Paper it has published, the British side not only fails to 
elaborate the specific process, but also distorts it, alleging 
that the Chinese side has violated the HKSAR's autonomy 
prescribed in the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law. Is this 
not another pretext to undermine Sino-British negotiations? 
  In the concluding part of the white paper, the British side 
ascribes the breakdown of the Sino-British negotiations to the 
"basic differences" between "China's far more restrictive 
electoral arrangements with far fewer voters" and the British 
side's "proposal which truly represents the interests of Hong 
Kong and the Hong Kong people." The fact publicized by the 
Chinese side is that, when the two sides almost reached a 
concensus in their talks on the elections of Hong Kong's 
district boards and the two municipal councils, the British side 
suddenly complicated the issue and insisted on incorporating 
Legco's single-seat, single-vote voting method with the 
memorandum of understanding about electoral arrangements for 
regional organizations; then, before the issue was discussed 
further, it brazenly declared that it was instructed to 
terminate the talks. Making such an important announcement 
during the course of the talks fully proves that British side 
had premediated it a long time ago. Later, the British side 
again violated the agreement and submitted Chris Patten's 
partial consitutional package to the British Legco in Hong Kong 
for discussion, thus terminatng the 17-rounds of Sino-British 
talks. The British side must be held responsible for the 
disruption of the Sino-British talks and it can never escape the 
responsibility no matter how it indulges in sophistry with sweet 
words and no matter how the white paper has painstakingly 
glossed over the facts. 
  In the White Paper, the British side tries its utmost to 
defend the longstanding lack of democracy in Hong Kong, but none 
of the explanations are tenable; rather, they fully expose its 
fear of the re-exercising of China's sovereignty over Hong Kong. 
People can see that why Britain never mentioned that it would 
promote democracy in Hong Kong prior to the signing of the 
Sino-British joint declaration in 1984 is because the time in 
those days was not favorable to Britain, but now it talks about 
"democracy" in a big way when there are only a few more years 
left before China re-exercises its sovereignty over Hong Kong. 
This is because it can use this beautiful word to create chaos 
in Hong Kong during its stable transition, to cultivate its own 
influence, and impose a pro-British, anti-China group on China 
so as to turn Hong Kong into a political entity having the 
audacity to demand independence or semi- independence from the 
central government so that Britain's political power and 
influence can continue beyond 1997 and China's sovereignty and 
administrative power will exist in name only. 
  One point stands out clearly from the facts which China and 
Britain have publicized, the scheme of the British side. For 
example, as soon as the negotiations started, the British side 
held firmly to the issue of the Legco members' request to ride 
the so-called "through train" all the way into the HKSAR 
legislative organ, and demanded that the Chinese side come up 
with "objective standards" which are "acceptable to the British 
side." Whether there is a "through train" in 1997 rests 
primarily with whether the arrangements for the 1994/95 
elections are in line with the relevant provisions in the Basic 
Law and whether Hong Kong's political system before 1997 can 
converge with the Basic Law. As for who can ride the "through 
train," they should be acknowledged by the HKSAR Preparatory 
Committee to be formed in 1996. But as soon as the negotiations 
started, the British side brazenly put forth the aforementioned 
demand which violates the Basic Law and China's sovereignty in 
order to keep the anti-China forces it has nurtured. Here is 
another example: During the negotiations, the British side time 
and again wanted to discuss three demands with the Chinese side: 
1) The Hong Kong members of the HKSAR Preparatory Committee 
should be produced through Sino-British consultations; 2) If the 
HKSAR agrees, the Chinese Government should support the 
Legislative Council's general election in 2007; and 3) The 
electoral committee in 1995 should henceforth become the model 
for producing the committee for nominating the first HKSAR Chief 
Executive as well as the committee for electing all the 
subsequent chief executives. These issues are irrelevant to the 
agenda of the negotiations. The first demand has been 
prescribed in the Basic Law, and the second and third demands 
should be issues to be dealt with after 1997, and that will be 
China's internal affairs after China resumes the exercise of its 
sovereignty in Hong Kong. That fact that the British side 
should come up with these demands nakedly bares its intention to 
cultivate its agents for Hong Kong's political stage after 1997 
to extend its administrative power there. 
  The foundation for Sino-British cooperation to achieve a 
stable transition in Hong Kong has now been destroyed. Under 
such circumstances, the Chinese side can only intensify all 
preparations so that, after Britain's three-tiered political 
framework in Hong Kong ends on 30 June 1997, it can be 
reorganized according to the decision made by the National 
People's Congress as well as the provisions in the Basic Law. 
What is gratifying is that the Preliminary Working Committee 
for the HKSAR Preparatory Committee has already started doing 
what is essential, and more and more Hong Kong people have 
become interested in or have taken part in Hong Kong's 
transitional affairs. We believe that any interference from the 
British side can only be compared to an ant trying to topple a 
giant tree, and that Hong Kong's future will be even brighter. "]

